What are Inner and Outer role preferences?
One way to understand inner and outer role preferences is that they are different ways of approaching similar work functions. Knowledge of how preference scores relate to the 16-fold Model of the Team Management Wheel may help respondents modify their approach to colleagues by pinpointing differences and similarities on a particular scale. The closer the role preferences are to each other, the more similar they will be. However, two people with the same major role preference may differ in some respects if one is an Inner Wheel and the other is an Outer Wheel.

What are the Outer Wheel role preferences?
These are: "ECBF," "ECAF," "ECAS," "EPAS," "IPAS," "IPBS," "IPBF," and "ICBF"

What are the Inner Wheel role preferences?
These are: "ICAF," "ECBS," "EPAF," "ICAS," "EPBS," "IPAF," "ICBS," and "EPBF" 

Consider an Explorer-Promoter, whose two defining constructs are Extrovert (E) on the Relationships scale and Creative (C) on the Information scale, ‘EC’. The respondent could have an Analytical (A) preference on the Decisions scale and a Flexible (F) preference on the Organisation scale, which would place them in the Outer Wheel, ‘ECAF’. Or this respondent could have a Beliefs (B) preference on the Decisions scale and a Structured (S) preference on the Organisation scale, which would place them in the Inner Wheel, ‘ECBS’.

Additionally, the model shows that people from quite different parts of the wheel may approach some things in a similar way. For example, an Inner Wheel Creator-Innovator (ICAF) has Introvert (I), Analytical (A) and Flexible (F) preferences, as does an Inner Wheel Controller-Inspector (IPAF). Awareness of overlaps like these can provide valuable insights when working with individuals and teams.

WHat are the differences between Inner and Outer Wheel major role preferences?

Role preferences in the outer sectors of the wheel are the result of the constructs from the Four Work Preference Measures (RIDO) pulling in the same direction. For example, if a person’s net scores show them to be Extrovert (E), Practical (P), Analytical (A) and Structured (S), these preferences pull in the same direction towards the Organisers part of the wheel.

Because these work preference reinforce each other, a person with an EPAS combination will have strong organising characteristics that are relatively easy to see. However, with Inner Wheel major role preferences, the RIDO combination are pulling in opposite directions across the wheel. For an Inner Wheel Thruster-Organiser (ICAS), their Analytical (A) and Structured (S) preferences pull towards the Organisers side of the wheel, while the Creative (C) and Introvert (I) preferences pull towards the Advisers.

What are some Applications for the 16-fold Model:

Some situations where the added value of using the 16-fold Model may be helpful include:

• Advanced Workshops – When a group has previously worked with the 8-fold Model of the Wheel, introducing the 16-fold Model can be a good way to re-visit the theory and provide extended learning.

• Extra Differentiation – To differentiate and explore the implications when respondents share a mixture of Inner and Outer Wheel combinations for the same role preference. For example, with a group of Explorer-Promoters, delve into how the respondents with Outer Wheel role preferences (ECAF) may like to approach tasks differently to those with Inner Wheel role preferences (ECBS).

• Individual Work – In coaching sessions, the 16-fold Model can be a useful way of gaining a deeper understanding of their major and related roles.

• Career Journeys – As explained in the TMP Personal Discovery Workbook (page 21), the 16-fold Model can be used to help illustrate how a person may change as they move position, organisation or career.

What are the Outer Wheel characteristics for Reporter-Advisers – ICBF?
• Gather information by using books, articles, journals, online sources etc.
• Prefer new ideas and future opportunities
• Focus on the ideal world

What are the Inner Wheel characteristics for Reporter-Advisers Inner Wheel – EPBF?
• Gather information through a network of trusted contacts
• Prefer improvements to existing situations
• Focus on down-to-earth, practical projects

What are the Outer Wheel characteristics for Creator-Innovators – ECBF?
• Gather ideas through interaction with others
• Review their thoughts by involving other people
• Excite and enthuse others about their ideas

What are the Inner Wheel characteristics for Creator-Innovators – ICAF?
• Come up with new ideas themselves
• Ensure their ideas are fully thought through
• Ideas are sometimes seen as radical by others

What are the Outer Wheel characteristics for Explorer-Promoters – ECAF?
• Look at all opportunities on offer and select one presenting the best pay-off
• Adaptable and comfortable with changing priorities
• Turn problems into opportunities

What are the Inner Wheel characteristics for Explorer-Promoters  – ECBS
• Drive forward ideas they strongly believe in
• May be reluctant to change their views
• Will press on with the original plan or idea

What are the Outer Wheel characteristics for Assessor-Developers – ECAS?
• Like to explore ideas through divergent thinking
• Place structure around ideas to get them into action quickly
• Will drive towards finishing a project

What are the Inner Wheel characteristics for Assessor-Developers – EPAF?
• Like to work on here and now projects
• Enjoy prototyping and market research to develop ideas that fit the organisation’s objectives
• Will experiment within existing parameters

What are the Outer Wheel characteristics for Thruster-Organisers – EPAS?
• Will be visible and interact with others to find out what is happening
• Concerned with the here and now
• Drive for action to deliver immediate results

What are the Inner Wheel characteristics for Thruster-Organisers – ICAS?
• Prefer to think through things alone before pushing forward their plan
• Focus on the future rather than the present
• Will expect quick action to be taken

What are the Outer Wheel characteristics for Concluder-Producers – IPAS?
• Focus on ensuring completion of the task
• Prefer to think things through alone rather than consulting others
• Can be tough negotiators

What are the Inner Wheel characteristics for Concluder-Producers – EPBS?
• Take personal pride in a job well done
• Will be quick to offer their opinion
• Ensure efficient standards are maintained

What are the Outer Wheel characteristics for Controller-Inspectors – IPBS?
• Like things to be done correctly and in the right way
• Will ensure controls are in place to minimise error
• Ensure existing systems are working properly

What are the Inner Wheel characteristics for Controller-Inspectors – IPAF?
• Analyse data to check it matches rules and standards
• Will change direction to follow the needs of the situation
• Propose alternative practical solutions

What are the Outer Wheel characteristics for Upholder-Maintainers – IPBF?
• Will safeguard current standards and ways of working
• Consult everyone on important issues
• Establish a harmonious working environment

What are the Inner Wheel characteristics for Upholder-Maintainers - ICBS?
• Will protect legacy and ethos of the team/organisation
• Like to converge on a limited number of possibilities when faced with a problem or opportunity
• Ideas are influenced by personal principles

What are the Inner and Outer Wheel characteristics of a Reporter-Adviser?

An Outer Wheel Reporter-Adviser is defined by the ICBF preference combination, whereas the Inner Wheel Reporter-Adviser by EPBF.

The common elements to both roles are Beliefs (B) and Flexible (F), and this combination defines the reporting nature of this sector.

What are the common characteristics of a Reporter-Adviser with Beliefs-Flexible (BF) preference?

The Advisers-Organisers axis runs from left to right across the Team Management Wheel. Directly opposite Reporter-Advisers lies the Analytical-Structured (AS) combination, which describes people who enjoy Organising. In contrast, Beliefs-Flexible (BF) people do not particularly enjoy the cut and thrust, which is often necessary to ensure everything is organised and happens on time. They tend to prefer the Advising role.

Only two percent of our worldwide database of over 600,000 people have a major role of Reporter-Adviser. This shows many organisations prefer Analytical and Structured characteristics over Beliefs and Flexible. With their strong Beliefs and Flexible organisation preference, Reporter-Advisers prefer to gather information and feed it to others, who can then organise for action to take place. People with the BF combination are often on a continuous search for the truth as they seek information that constantly reinforces and supports their beliefs.

Reporter-Advisers are usually good listeners, and many are attracted to professions such as Counselling, Consulting and Human Resources, where this skill is important. Reporter-Advisers are people with strong feelings who often rely on an internal gut response to interpret information. This causes them to be quite sensitive to what people say, and they often extract underlying meanings that many others miss.

What are the Outer Wheel characteristics of Reporter-Advisers with Introvert-Creative (IC) preference?

ICBF Reporter-Advisers are more Introverted in their relationships and more Creative in the way they gather and use information. They prefer to gather information about new ideas and future opportunities by using Introverted approaches. For example, they will often enjoy reading and like to gather their data from books, articles, journals, the internet and conferences.

Many will enjoy strategic planning or policy jobs where they can focus on the ideal world of ‘what could be’. Outer Wheel Reporter-Advisers do not particularly enjoy conflict and, because of this, will move to defuse these situations well before they occur. In this regard, they often have a ‘sixth sense’ that can be put to good use in a team.

What are the Inner Wheel characteristics of Reporter-Advisers with Extrovert-Practical (EP) preference?

EPBF Reporter-Advisers are more Extroverted in their relationships with people and more Practical in the information they gather and use. They will tend to collect their information in a more Extroverted way by using a network of contacts they have established. EPBF Reporter-Advisers also like to work on practical down-to-earth projects where they can experiment with ways of improving existing situations.

Related roles of an Inner Wheel Reporter-Advisor:

Inner Wheel Reporter-Advisers can also have interesting related roles. When the B score is low, the Assessor-Developer role is important. This combination describes someone who enjoys gathering data and developing it into a form for practical use within the organisation. When the F score is low, then the Concluder-Producer role is important. This combination describes someone who likes gathering the data but also enjoys carrying things through to completion rather than diverging in the search for yet more information.

What are the Inner and Outer Wheel characteristics of a Creator-Innovator?

An Outer Wheel Creator-Innovator is defined by the ECBF preference combination, whereas the Inner Wheel Creator-Innovator by ICAF. The common elements to both roles are Creative (C) and Flexible (F), and this combination defines the Creative nature of this sector, particularly as far as the world of ideas is concerned.

Common characteristics of Creative-Flexible (CF) preference: Creator-Innovators are future-oriented people who enjoy working with ideas and concepts. They are internal visual people who tend to think in pictures, by ‘image-inating’. One idea often leads to another, resulting in a divergent thinking process. Creator-Innovators tend to work in a Flexible, independent way and may not always value punctuality.

When working towards a goal, they may seem relatively unstructured in how they organise themselves. Still, they will usually meet important deadlines, even if it means working long hours at the last minute. Creator-Innovators like to focus on the future and enjoy enthusiastic discussions about ‘what might be’ rather than ‘what is’.

Outer Wheel characteristics of Extrovert-Beliefs (EB) preference: ECBF Creator-Innovators are more Extroverted in their relationships and more Beliefs-orientated in their decision making. Often their ideas are gathered through interacting with others, and they will usually check out their thoughts at an early stage by involving other people. They can also be very charismatic presenters or even zealots about ideas they really believe in. Many ECBF Creator-Innovators are almost like preachers as they excite and enthuse others about their ideas. However, sometimes their views may not be thoroughly analysed or tested, and it is important to know this when interacting with them.

Inner Wheel characteristics of Introvert-Analytical (IA) preference:

ICAF Creator-Innovators are more Introverted in their relationships and more Analytical in their decision making. Usually, their ideas are thought through, and when they speak, their ideas are not off the top of their head but have been comprehensively researched. Their analytical decision making preference will usually ensure a logical background to their thoughts.

The Inner Wheel Creator-Innovator will often come up with ideas that are well ahead of their time, unlike the Outer Wheel Creator-Innovator, whose thoughts are sometimes tempered by the views of those around them.

ICAF Creator-Innovators sometimes feel misunderstood when others reject their ideas which emanate from within, and as such, these can be quite radical and even threatening to others. Inner Wheel Creator-Innovators are often technical experts in their chosen field. They sometimes get carried away with jargon, making it difficult for others to understand what they are saying.

Related roles of an Inner Wheel Creator-Innovator:

Inner Wheel Creator-Innovators can also have interesting related roles. When the C score is low, the Controller-Inspector role is important, and the resulting profile is one where the person concerned enjoys thinking up new ideas but also pays attention to detail in how they might work. Many systems analysts and computer programmers have Split Wheels of this type. When the F score is low, an important related role is that of the Thruster-Organiser. This describes someone who will enjoy thinking up ideas but ensures that these are also put quickly into action. Many people working in research and development or policy jobs often show profiles of this type.

What are the Inner and Outer Wheel characteristics of an Explorer-Promoter?

An Outer Wheel Explorer-Promoter is defined by the ECAF preference combination, whereas the Inner Wheel Explorer-Promoter by ECBS. The common elements of both roles are Extrovert (E) and Creative (C), and this combination defines the Exploring nature of this sector. Extroversion is about exploring relationships and Creative information-gathering is about exploring ideas.

Common characteristics of Extrovert-Creative (EC) preference:

The outer sector also has an Analytical decision making preference and Flexible organisation, whereas Beliefs and Structured organisation drive the inner sector. Flexible organisation is more exploring than Structured organisation as it describes a preparedness to change direction when relevant information comes to hand.

Structured organisation is about sticking to a plan and not allowing deviations from a previously agreed goal. Analytical decision making is also more exploring than Beliefs decision making.

People who are driven by their beliefs can lock in with passion to ideas they fervently believe in and therefore are sometimes reluctant to change. Analytical decision making describes a situation where objective analysis is made and an advantage taken of all opportunities.

The net effect of the combinations of ECAF and ECBS is to describe people who have strong exploring characteristics but the ECAF combination is slightly stronger in the exploring domain. Which is why the ECAF combination is on the Outer Wheel and ECBS is on the Inner Wheel.

Outer Wheel characteristics of Analytical-Flexible (AF) preference:

ECAF people tend to be more resilient entrepreneurs than ECBS people. For ECAF, there are usually no problems – only opportunities. They often have the happy knack of turning a problem into an opportunity! They also seem to be able to put the past behind them and bounce back from any failure. Entrepreneurs tend to fail multiple times before they succeed; therefore, the ability to bounce back can be essential for success.

Inner Wheel characteristics of Beliefs-Structured (BS) preference:

ECBS people can also be successful entrepreneurs because they will drive forward in a structured, organised way with ideas they believe. They can therefore be exciting and charismatic people to be around. However, sometimes they press on with their ideas when it is obvious to everyone except the ECBS that things are not going to work out. Usually, they are the last to recognise failure, as to do so can cause a re-evaluation of their internal beliefs and values. Consequently, they tend to be less resilient to failure and may not always rebound with new ideas as quickly as the ECAF.

Related roles of an Inner Wheel Explorer-Promoter:

Inner Wheel Explorer-Promoters can also have interesting related roles. When the C score is low, the Concluder-Producer role may be important. This combination often describes people who enjoy looking for new ideas and focusing on the big picture but also pay attention to outputs and delivering results. When the E score is low, an important related role is that of the Upholder-Maintainer. This describes someone who will enjoy promoting the work of the team or organisation but will also have a high concern for people and enjoy working in a supportive way with others.

What are the Inner and Outer Wheel characteristics of an Assessor-Developer?

An Outer Wheel Assessor-Developer is defined by the ECAS preference combination, whereas the Inner Wheel Assessor- Developer by EPAF. The common elements of both roles are Extrovert (E) and Analytical (A), and this combination defines the Assessing nature of this sector.

Common characteristics of Extrovert-Analytical (EA) preference:

Assessor-Developers like to analyse ideas and check whether they are likely to work by consulting and interacting with others. In this way, they can develop plans that take account of organisational constraints and have a high degree of acceptance by others. When interacting with Assessor-Developers it is important to understand that they like dealing with people who can communicate clearly, precisely and logically. Be sure to back up any opinions with facts.

Outer Wheel characteristics of Creative-Structured (CS) preference:

ECAS Assessor-Developers are outgoing people who like to explore opportunities, but these opportunities will usually be reality-tested through logical, rational analysis. They like to focus on the world of ideas through divergent thinking but will then converge once they have a workable idea. Whereas CF combinations tend to continue diverging, with one idea leading to another, CS combinations will put a structure around the ideas and plan to get them into action as soon as possible.

According to the research, ECAS Assessor-Developers are strongly represented amongst managers working as CEOs. Many organisations look to their senior managers to communicate the vision of where the business should be going. People with an EC preference are more likely to enjoy this activity and see it as a priority. However, a system needs to be in place to ensure this vision is put into action. This corresponds to an AS preference which is more associated with thrusting and driving characteristics. There are many successful CEOs with other preferences, but it is interesting to note the effect of organisational expectations, which shape and influence the preferences of individual managers.

Inner Wheel characteristics of Practical-Flexible (PF) preference:

EPAF Assessor-Developers are more Practical in how they gather and use information and more Flexible in how they like to organise. They tend to prefer working on here-and-now projects, refining and developing them so they can be concluded and produced. They particularly enjoy developing prototypes of products or services, tinkering with them to fit the organisation’s goals and objectives best.

Inner Wheel Assessor-Developers also show the PF creativity combination, which is particularly valuable when they are involved in experimenting with new markets or products. EPAF Assessor-Developers are less common than ECAS Assessor-Developers. Data from more than 600,000 people worldwide shows there are over three times as many Outer Wheel Assessor-Developers as Inner Wheel.

Related roles of an Inner Wheel Assessor-Developer:

Inner Wheel Assessor-Developers can also have interesting related roles. When the E score is low, the Controller-Inspector role is important. This combination describes someone who enjoys developing prototypes but also focuses on the details surrounding the new products, markets or projects. When the A score is low, the Reporter-Adviser role is important. People with this profile tend to move back and forth between gathering information and developing plans using this information.

What are the Inner and Outer Wheel characteristics of a Thruster-Organiser?

An Outer Wheel Thruster-Organiser is defined by the EPAS preference combination, whereas the Inner Wheel Thruster-Organiser has the combination ICAS. The common elements of both roles are Analytical (A) and Structured (S), and this combination defines the Thrusting nature of this sector.

Common characteristics of Analytical-Structured (AS) preference:

Thruster-Organisers are action-oriented, professional in their dealings and focussed on achieving goals. They also deal in the facts and respond well to others who show the same command of the facts that they have. They are time conscious and appreciate punctuality. When Thruster-Organisers say they can meet for five minutes at 2 pm, they usually mean from 2:00 to 2:05. Creator-Innovators have undoubtedly experienced what it is like to be late for a meeting with strong Thruster-Organisers!

Outer Wheel characteristics of Extrovert-Practical (EP) preference:

EPAS Thruster-Organisers are more Extroverted in their relationships and more Practical in how they gather and use information. In fact, the ‘thrusting’ nature of the Outer Wheel Thruster-Organiser is often more visible than that of the Inner Wheel role preference. An Outer Wheel Thruster-Organiser will be very concerned with the present and want to get into action to deliver results. If they are not getting the results they want, they will soon get out of their office and interact with others to find out what is happening.

Inner Wheel characteristics of Introvert-Creative (IC) preference:

While people may describe Outer Wheel Thruster-Organisers as ‘calling a spade, a spade’, the ICAS Thruster-Organisers tend to be more of the quiet achiever. They are more Introverted and prefer to focus on the future rather than the present. When faced with challenges, they may contemplate various options on their own, and when they have come up with a solution they are satisfied with, they will want to get into action as soon as possible. This tendency to keep ideas to themselves and then expect things to be done ‘yesterday’, can cause problems with team members unless the Thruster-Organiser has developed good Linking Skills.

Related roles of an Inner Wheel Thruster-Organiser:

Inner Wheel Thruster-Organisers can also have interesting related roles. When the A score is low, the Upholder-Maintainer role can be quite strong, giving Thruster-Organiser characteristics, which are tempered by an interest in supporting and maintaining the team. When the S score is low on the ICAS combination, then a Thruster-Organiser/Creator-Innovator Split Wheel results. This is quite common for someone with a research or policy background.

What are the Inner and Outer Wheel characteristics of a Concluder-Producer?

An Outer Wheel Concluder-Producer is defined by the IPAS preference combination, whereas the Inner Wheel Concluder-Producer has the combination EPBS. The common elements of both roles are Practical (P) and Structured (S), and this combination defines the Concluding nature of this sector.

Common characteristics of Practical-Structured (PS) preference:

Both inner and outer roles prefer to work in a down-to-earth, Practical way, focusing on the here-and-now rather than tomorrow. Also, they like to work in a Structured, action-oriented way, ensuring that work is delivered on time and to agreed targets and performance levels. Concluder-Producers are steady, stable, reliable and can be counted on in a crisis to deliver the goods.

Outer Wheel characteristics of Introvert-Analytical (IA) preference:

IPAS Concluder-Producers are more Introverted and Analytical. They tend to work in a quieter way, getting on with the task at hand and preferring to think things through on their own rather than asking others for their help. The combination of the Analytical with the Structured score gives rise to driving or thrusting characteristics, and Outer Wheel Concluder-Producers can be tough when difficult business decisions need to be made. Depending upon the nature of their beliefs, Inner Wheel Concluder-Producers are often less demanding. They may well be influenced by the views of others, particularly on issues of fairness and equity.

Inner Wheel characteristics of Extrovert-Beliefs (EB) preference:

The EPBS Concluder-Producer is more Extroverted and Beliefs-orientated and may have a ‘black or white’ perspective on many issues. If beliefs are shared, they can be the greatest friend and ally; if beliefs are opposed, they will quickly give their opinion – whether asked for or not. They also tend to be quite sociable at work and often enjoy organising group activities, directly or indirectly related to work.

In the research database of more than 600,000 respondents, there are nearly seven times as many Outer Wheel Concluder-Producers (20%) as there are Inner Wheel ones (3%). This highlights the preferences that organisations seem to have for Analytical decision makers rather than Beliefs-oriented decision makers.

Related roles of an Inner Wheel Concluder-Producer:

Inner Wheel Concluder-Producers can also have interesting related roles. When the P score is low, a related role is that of Explorer-Promoter. This combination often describes people who enjoy looking for opportunities and carrying them through to implementation, unlike many strong Explorer-Promoters who may move from one opportunity to the next without personally concluding and producing. A low score on S for the EPBS combination will give the Reporter-Adviser as a related role. This describes someone who puts effort into gathering all the information before getting into action and setting up systems and procedures for task delivery.

What are the Inner and Outer Wheel characteristics of a Controller-Inspector?

An Outer Wheel Controller-Inspector is defined by the IPBS preference combination, whereas the Inner Wheel Controller-Inspector by IPAF. The common elements to both roles are Introvert (I) and Practical (P) and this combination defines the Controlling nature of this sector.

Common characteristics of Introvert-Practical (IP) preference:

Both Inner and Outer Wheel Controller-Inspectors enjoy working on here-and-now issues, and they like to concentrate on them in depth, free from interruptions. In this way, they can focus on the details of any problems or opportunities.

Many Controller-Inspectors enjoy working in areas associated with finance, computers, security, contracts and quality. Controller-Inspectors are quieter people who like to think things through before committing. When faced with a new idea, they will want to make sure that it will work and therefore need time to check that every eventuality has been anticipated. They may speak slightly slower than others as they like to choose their words carefully to avoid misunderstandings. Therefore you may need to slow down if you are a fast talker!

Conntroller-Inspectors are usually excellent observers who like to relate the past to the present and future. If introducing ‘change’ to Controller-Inspectors, ensure that ‘new directions’ relate to past successes. If a proposal builds on past events, they will be more receptive to the idea..

Outer Wheel characteristics of Beliefs-Structured (IC) preference:

IPBS Controller-Inspectors prefer Beliefs decision making and are more Structured in the way they like to organise themselves and others. For them, there is often a right and wrong way and they can be determined to make sure things are done correctly. Their great strength is in ensuring that existing systems are working correctly, and if they are managing a team, they can be very demanding when mistakes are made. Of the two types, the Outer Wheel Controller-Inspector is the more Controlling. They will want to work quietly and systematically, ensuring that everyone focuses on the task at hand and that the work outputs are delivered accurately. When deviations occur, they will ensure that controls are in place to reduce error.

Inner Wheel characteristics of Analytical-Flexible (AF) preference:

IPAF Controller-Inspectors are more Analytical in their decision making and more Flexible in how they organise themselves and others. Consequently, they tend to enjoy the Inspecting role. They will enjoy gathering and checking practical data and analysing it to determine how it matches up against standards. The financial IPAF Controller-Inspector, for example, will very likely enjoy sifting through accounts, checking the integrity of the data and painstakingly ensuring that everything is accurately recorded. Because of their Flexible organisation preference, they can readily change direction as they follow the needs of the situation.

Inner Wheel Controller-Inspectors have what we call PF creativity. These individuals apply a practical approach to information processing, yet they often enjoy experimentation, seeking the most effective practical techniques. Their unique blend of practicality and curiosity creates a distinct form of creativity that others frequently admire. Artisans and do-it-yourself enthusiasts are good examples of PF creativity.

Related roles of an Inner Wheel Controller-Inspector:

Inner Wheel Controller-Inspectors can also have interesting related roles. When the P score is low, the Creator-Innovator role is important. The resulting profile is one in which they enjoy working with detail but continuously look to new ideas to improve results. When the I score is low, an important role is that of the Assessor-Developer. This describes someone who will focus on the details but also like variety in their tasks. They will also enjoy working with others, consulting them for their input and planning for success.

What are the Inner and Outer Wheel characteristics of an Upholder-Maintainer?

An Outer Wheel Upholder-Maintainer is defined by the IPBF preference combination; the Inner Wheel Upholder-Maintainer by ICBS. The common elements to both roles are Introvert (I) and Beliefs (B) and this combination defines the Upholding nature of this sector.

Common characteristics of Introvert-Beliefs (IB) preference:

Upholder-Maintainers are quieter people who like to think before they speak and enjoy supporting in the background within the team. Their beliefs strongly influence their decision making, and they prefer to make decisions that agree with and reinforce their values.

With a preference to work in a low-key manner, Upholder-Maintainers will not usually impose their beliefs and values upon others. However, if they feel an injustice has been done, they can go into battle against almost anyone. There can be some fascinating interactions between Upholder-Maintainers and Thruster-Organisers – very much like the immovable object meeting the irresistible force!

Outer Wheel characteristics of Practical-Flexible (PF) preference:

IPBF Upholder-Maintainers are Practical in how they gather information and Flexible in how they like to organise themselves and others. They can apply themselves for long hours to a particular task and work at it until the results meet their usually high standards. This is particularly the case where the project centres around issues that are extremely important to them.

Outer Wheel Upholder-Maintainers often prefer to lead by example and like to gain mastery over their specialist area, setting an example for others to follow. They usually don’t expect others to do things they can’t do themselves. They also tend to show what is sometimes call ‘PF creativity’; although they prefer to focus on the present, working in a here-and-now practical manner, they also like to gather lots of data and experiment with the best way of doing things. Others may praise their creativity in improving systems or procedures. This is similar to a do-it-yourself home renovator, who has experimented with many ways of making something that others describe as creative.

Inner Wheel characteristics of Creative-Structured (CS) preference:

ICBS Upholder-Maintainers tend to look more to the world of ideas and concepts and work in a structured, action-oriented way to get things done. They enjoy thinking up ideas, but these ideas are internally generated and usually filtered through their beliefs. Inner Wheel Upholder-Maintainers show ‘CS creativity’, which means that they tend to be less divergent in their ideas compared to roles with the CF combination. Rather than explore all possible options when faced with a particular problem or opportunity, they are more likely to select from a limited range of possibilities and then move to get that idea implemented as soon as possible.

While Inner Wheel Upholder-Maintainers will enjoy change, they tend to be happier with incremental change rather than major changes of direction. They will prefer to work in a quiet, organised, harmonious manner with people who share their beliefs and values, making small changes and improvements to existing systems.

Related roles of an Inner Wheel Upholder-Maintainer:

Inner Wheel Upholder-Maintainers can also have interesting related roles. When the B score is low, a related role is that of Thruster-Organiser. This combination sometimes describes people who can be Thrusting and Organising in their work but who are also feelings-oriented in the management of others. A low score on I for the ICBS combination will give Explorer-Promoter as a related role. This combination describes a person who enjoys working in a supportive way with others but will also take the initiative in promoting the work of the team or organisation to others.